Time Now for morning rounds with CBS News chief medical correspondent doctor john look and news contributor doctor
terra first up a statement of caution for patients with heart failure the
american heart association warn that many commonly used medications could
cause or worsen heart failure for those with the condition
what kind of medications we talking about this is such a statement anthony both for doctors
and patients living with heart failure this statement
outlined the prescription medication and over-the-counter medication and
complementary herbal or supplement medications that might exacerbate heart failure this
very vulnerable group of patients they live in a delicate balance between being
compensated and stable and suddenly having the balance tip to the point where they're d complicated and they end up
in the hospital so they are on multiple medications many of them up to seven prescription med
multiple providers they have lots of other medical condition that
really wonderful that we have this guide out there now and some of these medications
they exacerbate heart failure in different ways some of them do by actually affecting the
mile cardiol cells toxic to them some of them cause retention of sodium
which increases fluid retention others affect how well the heartbeat or contract another
one simply affect the ability of the patient own heart failure medications
to work effectively what really caught my ear that herbal supplement and over-the-counter
are all trained to think these are okay...like...I spoke to doctor robert page
the lead author of this statement and he the clinical pharmacology
the university of colorado school of poverty and he really emphasized how
important is to realize that these substances are pharmacological the active so,
for example, he pointed out that antacid have sodium and I
went this morning and I looked at, you know, you have to really look...how much sodium is
in there and I'm sure they differ one to the other there's ibuprofen and things like that these
that can cause fluid retention in cold medicines and other kinds of medicine and then
there are decongestants, decongestants likes to the bed and they are part of cold medicines
and they can have cause problems but the hard so you really...drug urban direction anything
that's pharmacologically active can cause a problem even if it's supposedly
urban so I tell my patients brown bag it,
throw everything in there let me take a look at exactly what you are you taking the drug...the patient
wanting to bring it up so you really have to make sure to look for those terra as you point out
in the heart failure patient can be taking up to seven different medication
you keep track of all this stuff right most important I not only tell my heart patient
but all patient that they should keep a list on them at all times of the
the medication the frequency they should understand why they're taking what they're taking
an any changes to their medications that are being made either med stopping or starting
they should call the doctor managing heart failure and they can say can I stop can I start
that it's helpful to have with the statement called the captain of your medication
somebody can really oversee everything you're taking and we need to tell patients to get the
habit of checking the label that john said not just for a fault in our sodium and
cans of soup but also on our medication labeled as well, you know,
I think a lot of things we can do at
to hopefully...and the doctors have to really these days
be using a computer these drug-drug interactions you cannot keep track of them
that and brown bag is a really good piece of advice...and...all right moving on
history diagnosis mary todd lincoln had a lot of tragedy and trauma in her life she
lost to young children of course
next to her husband the president when he was assassinated in eighteen sixty
five all that contributed to years and depression but now a medical expert
believe a physical cause for mental struggle john has more on that.
History has not been kind to mary todd lincoln wife
of our sixteenth president she would attempt to
...unpredictable force
eventually her son had her commited madame president
sally field two thousand twelve portrayal show firce sharp first lady
...when have I been bam boozled
This white area here is not her dress its her skin but doctor john photos
physician and medical historian that famously fiery first lady
was not only misunderstood but misdiagnosed photos
...a new theory about mary todd lincoln and erratic
behavior was caused by a condition called per...that
impairs the body's ability to absorb vitamin btwelve from food efficiently
...the person becomes btwelve the patient eventually and that causes
lots of problems and almost every organ in the body ultimately...fatal illness until treatment
with discovered decade after her death disease can lead to many
symptoms exhibited by mary todd lincoln sore mouth
pale skin difficulty walking and psychiatric problems
it can also cause swelling the puffy ness it is not in a way that would occur
with just accumulation of fat today the disease can be picked up on a
simple blood test and easily treated with btwelve supplement she had a
sick brain and was doing the best she could in a very complicated
demanding environment and I think to have done as well as she did with the
kind of handicaps that she had I think that deserves our admiration, you know,
I do have some patients not that common who have pernicious anemia before I tell the...I have to
tell them look I'm about to use a word as
Oddly harmful we could...prodigious...not...anymore you're easily treated
not fatal you give btwelve supplementation so it it's out there
and it's amazing to look back in history and see something like that but not so pernicious afterall
we should say something that he's making a diagnosis,
you know, a hard enough to make a diagnosis in present an to make a hundred-years ago
thank you both very much.